# eeg-alcohol-use-predictor
This project shows the development of models for prediction of alcohol use status using EEG data. Two publicly available datasets were used for developing and testing the models. The first is from the University of California Irvine (UCI) Machine Learning Repository, and is described at https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/EEG+Database. The second is from the Max Planck Institute Leipzig (MPIL) Mind-Brain-Body database, and is described by Babayan et al (2019) at https://www.nature.com/articles/sdata2018308. EEG data were extracted from both datasets using the Python MNE package (https://mne.tools/stable/index.html) and converted into average band powers. An introductory outline of average band powers can be found at https://raphaelvallat.com/bandpower.html.

A variety of models were trained on the UCI dataset, consisting of EEG readings from 122 alcoholic and non-alcoholic subjects, with hyperparameters optimised and preferred models selected using cross validation. These models were then tested on EEG data from the MPIL dataset, which involved 227 participants undergoing several assessments, including MRI scans, physiological testing and psychological symptom scales. One of these was the AUDIT screen, a questionnaire on alcohol use that generates a score ranging from 0 to 40. A score of 8 or above indicates hazardous or risky drinking, so I have used this as a cut-off for dividing the participant group into hazardous drinkers and others. EEG readings were taken from the MPIL dataset for both eyes-open and eyes-closed conditions, so I have constructed a separate dataframe for each condition. Ten models were trained on the UCI dataset, so with each of these being tested on 2 sets of data from the MPIL subjects, 20 tests were conducted altogether. For the vast majority of these, sensitivity and specificity summed close to 1, indicating that the models were of no use in distiguishing between hazardous drinkers and others. In one case, the test gave a sensitivity of 89% and a specificity of 21%, potentially giving it very marginal utility as a "rule out" test, meaning that a positive test result would be unhelpful, but a negative test would suggest a 91% probability (corresponding to class 0 precision) of the test subject *not* being a hazardous drinker. That being said, one seemingly helpful result out of 20 tests could easily occur by chance, and 91% is only a modest improvement on the pre-test probability of 83%, given the proportion of non-hazardous drinkers or non-drinkers in the sample.

The overall conclusion is therefore that the models trained on the UCI dataset have not proven helpful for predicting hazardous drinking when tested on the MPIL dataset. This does not mean that there is no value in using EEG data for this purpose, but simply that it has not been shown in this case. If hypothetically there were some value, there are a number of reasons why it may not have been shown here. The EEG conditions may have been different between the two groups, and did indeed use different locations for the ground electrode. The criteria for being "alcoholic" in the UCI subject group may have been different from the one I used for the MPIL group, and in fact I was unable to find a description of how "alcoholic" was defined for the UCI dataset. The MPIL EEG data have been preprocessed for artefact removal. Several methods are available for this, but for the UCI dataset there were several measurements for each subject so I have used the rather crude approach of taking the median for this analysis, whereas a more systematic approach to artefact removal may have been needed. Finally, there are several alternatives to average band power for quantitive analysis of EEG data, and variations even in how band powers can be calculated and applied, so some other approach might possibly yield a more helpful model.

A test for alcohol use status based on EEG data would probably have limited clinical value. As a clinician, I would be more interested just to ask the patient about their drinking habits. However, this project has shown a complete process (excluding the treatment of artefacts) in which EEG data can be used to construct a machine learning or deep learning model. Models of this sort could have great value for helping to choose between different treatment options for one or another neurological or mental health condition if predictors could be developed and shown to be reliable.
